New guide about monitoring a validator node (#1932)
LiskHQ/lisk-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/run-blockchain/monitoring-node.adoc

= Monitoring a validator node
Muhammad Talha <muhammad.talha@lightcurve.io>
// Settings
:toc: preamble
:toclevels: 5
:page-toclevels: 3
:idprefix:
:idseparator: -
:sectnums:
:experimental:

// External URLs
:url_plugin_monitor: {site-url}/lisk-sdk/v6/references/typedoc/modules/_liskhq_lisk_framework_monitor_plugin.html
:url_plugin_monitor_config: {site-url}/lisk-sdk/v6/references/typedoc/modules/_liskhq_lisk_framework_monitor_plugin.html#$config-options
:url_cors_intro: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS
:url_prometheus: https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/overview/
:url_monitor_endpoints: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk/blob/development/framework-plugins/lisk-framework-monitor-plugin/src/endpoint.ts

// Project URLs
:url_guides_config: build-blockchain/configuration.adoc
:url_guides_config_hello: {url_guides_config}#example-configuration-for-the-hello-world-client
:url_core_index: v4@lisk-core::index.adoc

> The {url_plugin_monitor}[Monitor plugin^] provides insights about a running node, for example, if a node is down or a node is missing blocks, etc.

Reviewer: Instead, please introduce the Monitor plugin a little more directly in the intro of this guide, what are its main features and use cases?

> The {url_plugin_monitor}[Monitor plugin^] provides insights about a running node, for example, if a node is down or a node is missing blocks, etc.

Author: Done

> The Monitor plugin takes the data reported by {url_prometheus}[Prometheus (an open-source systems monitoring and alerting toolkit)^] and exposes the data into a standard format using its own <<retrieving-data ,endpoints>>.

Author: Corrected

====
On this page, you'll learn:

* [x] Registration of the Monitor plugin to a blockchain client.
* [x] Configuring the Monitor plugin.

> * [x] Retrieving various types of data from the Monitor plugin.

Reviewer: if this is the only content on this page, it should be renamed to "How to enable the Monitor plugin" or something similar, as it doesn't provide any additional approach and also no bigger picture like context and use cases for monitoring different metrics.

Author: Text updated

[tabs]
=====
Available Configurations::
+
--
[cols="1,1,2,2",options="header",stripes="hover"]
|===
|Name
|Type
|Description
|Sample

|`port`
|string
|Defines the `port` for a custom express server.
|`4003`

|`host`
|string
|Defines the `host` such as a custom express server.
|`127.0.0.1`

|`whiteList`
|string
|When given a value, only those IPs are allowed to interact with the Monitor plugin.
|`['127.0.0.1']`

|`cors`
|string
|Defines the {url_cors_intro}[CORS^] properties such as `origin` and allowed `methods` which should be entertained by the Monitor plugin.
a|
[source,json]
----
"cors": {
    "origin": '*',
    "methods": ['GET', 'POST', 'PUT'],
},
----

|`limits`
|string
|Defines various types of limits for example `max`, `delayMs`, `delayeAfter`, `windowMs`, `headersTimeout`, and `serverSetTimeout` for the monitor plugin.
a|
[source,json]
----
"limits": {
    "max": 0,
    "delayMs": 0,
    "delayAfter": 0,
    "windowMs": 60000,
    "headersTimeout": 5000,
    "serverSetTimeout": 20000,
},
----
|===
--
Usage::
+
--
.config.json
[source,json]
----
"plugins": {
    "monitor": {
        "port": "9000"
    }
}
----
--
=====

> == Retrieving data

Reviewer: Here is miss usage examples, how to invoke the different endpoints, and how the responses look like. It should also include a link to a guide / docs that explain how to track endpoints with prometheus

Author: Usage example added

= How to enable the Monitor plugin
Muhammad Talha <muhammad.talha@lightcurve.io>
// Settings
:toc: preamble
:toclevels: 5
:page-toclevels: 3
:idprefix:
:idseparator: -
:sectnums:
:experimental:

// External URLs
:url_plugin_monitor: {site-url}/lisk-sdk/v6/references/typedoc/modules/_liskhq_lisk_framework_monitor_plugin.html
:url_plugin_monitor_config: {site-url}/lisk-sdk/v6/references/typedoc/modules/_liskhq_lisk_framework_monitor_plugin.html#$config-options
:url_cors_intro: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS
:url_prometheus: https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/overview/
:url_monitor_endpoints: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk/blob/development/framework-plugins/lisk-framework-monitor-plugin/src/endpoint.ts
:url_grafana: https://prometheus.io/docs/visualization/grafana/
:url_prometheus_configuration: https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/

// Project URLs
:url_guides_config: build-blockchain/configuration.adoc
:url_guides_config_hello: {url_guides_config}#example-configuration-for-the-hello-world-client
:url_core_index: lisk-core::index.adoc

The *Monitor plugin* provides insights about a running node, for example:

> * It provides developers with vital information on block processing and network performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* It provides information about blocks and transactions received from the network.
```

> * It also provides information to determine machine performance relative to network activity.

Reviewer 2: It does not have any information about machine performance but more like network activity on your node
```suggestion
* It provides information about connected/disconnected/banned peers and including some other network activities.
```

> * The Monitor plugin gives hints for debugging the network, and detecting any network attacks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The Monitor plugin gives hints for debugging the network, and detecting any network splits or attacks.
```

> * The Monitor plugin gives hints for debugging the network, and if there is an attack on the network.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The Monitor plugin gives hints for debugging the network, and detecting any network attacks.
```

> * One can also receive information about the performance of the custom module via the Monitor plugin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Information regarding the performance of the custom module can also be obtained through the Monitor plugin.
```

> * Information regarding the performance of the custom module can also be obtained through the Monitor plugin.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if we can get any insight around performance of custom module

The Monitor plugin monitors a node's activity and stores this data in the plugin's store.
It then exposes the aforementioned data using the endpoints as described in the <<retrieving-data>> section.
The Monitor plugin also exports this data in the Prometheus format for the {url_prometheus}[Prometheus toolkit (an open-source systems monitoring and alerting toolkit)^].

====

> On this page, you'll learn:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On this page, you'll learn how to perform the following:
```

> * [x] Registration of the Monitor plugin to a blockchain client.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [x] Register the Monitor plugin to a blockchain client.
```

> * [x] Configuring the Monitor plugin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [x] Configure the Monitor plugin.
```

> * [x] Retrieving various types of data from the Monitor plugin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [x] Retrieve various types of data from the Monitor plugin.
```

====

Using this guide, the Monitor plugin can be registered to a xref:{url_core_index}[Lisk Core] node or any Lisk-based blockchain client.

== Plugin registration

> With the latest version of Lisk Core v4 and Lisk SDK v6, the default plugins come pre-installed after a client is installed or initiated, respectively.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With the latest version of Lisk Core v4 and Lisk SDK v6, the default plugins come pre-installed after a client is installed or initiated respectively.
```

> You can check the `package.json` file of the blockchain client to ensure the installation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can check the `package.json` file of the blockchain client to ensure the installation has been performed correctly.
```

.hello_client/package.json
[source,json]
----
"dependencies": {
  //[...]
	"@liskhq/lisk-framework-monitor-plugin": "0.4.1",
	//[...]
},
----

Otherwise, you can install the Monitor plugin like this:
 
[source,bash]
----
npm install --save @liskhq/lisk-framework-monitor-plugin
----

There are various ways to enable the Monitor plugin.

> You can opt for any of the below-mentioned to register the plugin to the blockchain client.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can opt for any of the below-mentioned options to register the plugin to the blockchain client.
```

[IMPORTANT]
====

> It is essential to enable WS API and configure the `allowedMethods` property before registering the `MonitorPlugin`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is essential to enable the WS API and configure the `allowedMethods` property before registering the `MonitorPlugin`.
```

For more information, see the configurations described in the xref:{url_guides_config_hello}[configuration guide].
====

=== Registering via source
For blockchain clients that were initialized with Lisk Commander, it is possible to register the plugin through the `plugins.ts` file.
Open the `plugins.ts` file, import the Monitor plugin, and register it with the application as shown below:

.src/app/plugins.ts
[source,typescript]
----
/* eslint-disable @typescript-eslint/no-empty-function */
import { MonitorPlugin } from '@liskhq/lisk-framework-monitor-plugin';
import { Application } from 'lisk-sdk';

export const registerPlugins = (app: Application): void => {
    app.registerPlugin(new MonitorPlugin ());
};

----

Save and close the `plugins.ts` file.

After updating the *plugins.ts* file, build the blockchain client again:

[source,bash]
----
npm run build
----

== Starting the node

> Depending on how you chose to register the plugin, start the blockchain client, accordingly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Depending on how you chose to register the plugin, start the blockchain client accordingly.
```

[tabs]
=====
Registered via built-in flag::
+
--
It is also possible to enable the Monitor plugin without updating the `plugins.ts` file.
This can be done simply by adding the `--enable-monitor-plugin` flag to the `start` command.

.*Mainchain*
* Start the blockchain client with designated flags on a `mainchain` node.
+
[source,bash]
----
lisk-core start --network testnet --enable-monitor-plugin
----

.*Sidechain*
* *Or*, start the blockchain client with designated flags on a `sidechain` node.
+
[source,bash]
----
./bin/run start --config=config/custom_config.json --enable-monitor-plugin
----
--
Registered via Source::
+
--

.Start the blockchain client with custom_config.json
[source,bash]
----
./bin/run start --config=config/custom_config.json 
----
--
=====

== Configuring the Monitor Plugin

> The Monitor plugin comes with a set of pre-defined configurations, which can be tweaked as per the node operator's needs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Monitor plugin comes with a set of pre-defined configurations, which can be tweaked as per the node operator's requirements.
```

[tabs]
=====
Available Configurations::
+
--
[cols="1,1,2,2",options="header",stripes="hover"]
|===
|Name
|Type
|Description
|Sample

|`port`
|string
|Defines the `port` for a custom express server.
|`4003`

|`host`
|string
|Defines the `host` such as a custom express server.
|`127.0.0.1`

|`whiteList`
|string
|When given a value, only those IPs are allowed to interact with the Monitor plugin.
|`['127.0.0.1']`

|`cors`
|string

> |Defines the {url_cors_intro}[CORS^] properties such as `origin` and allowed `methods` which should be entertained by the Monitor plugin.

Reviewer 3: imho we should just slightly reword this line to the following:
Defines the {url_cors_intro}[CORS^] properties such as `origin` and allowed `methods` which should be handled by the Monitor plugin.

> |Defines the {url_cors_intro}[CORS^] properties such as `origin` and allowed `methods` which should be entertained by the Monitor plugin.

Author: ```suggestion
|Defines the {url_cors_intro}[CORS^] properties such as origin and allowed methods which should be handled by the Monitor plugin.
```

a|
[source,json]
----
"cors": {
    "origin": '*',
    "methods": ['GET', 'POST', 'PUT'],
},
----

|`limits`
|string
|Defines various types of limits for example `max`, `delayMs`, `delayeAfter`, `windowMs`, `headersTimeout`, and `serverSetTimeout` for the monitor plugin.
a|
[source,json]
----
"limits": {
    "max": 0,
    "delayMs": 0,
    "delayAfter": 0,
    "windowMs": 60000,
    "headersTimeout": 5000,
    "serverSetTimeout": 20000,
},
----
|===
--
Usage::
+
--
.config.json
[source,json]
----
"plugins": {
    "monitor": {
        "port": "9000"
    }
}
----
--
=====

== Retrieving data
The data recorded by the Monitor plugin can be retrieved via RPC endpoints or in Prometheus format, as described in the following sub-sections.

=== Via RPC endpoints
The monitor plugin exposes four endpoints that return important data about a validator's node.

> The following table briefly describes each:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following table briefly describes them:
```

> The monitor plugin exposes four endpoints that return important data about a validator's node.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if it really helps validator node with any information around forging a block but yes in general it does help a node to see how it is connected and receiving information with the network

Author: I have removed the term `validator`.

[cols="3,~",options="header",stripes="hover"]
|===
|Name
|Description

|*monitor_getTransactionStats*
|Returns the data about the number of times a transaction is received on an average from the network for a given number of connected peers.

|*monitor_getBlockStats*
|Returns the data about the number of times a block is received on an average from the network for a given number of connected peers.

|*monitor_getNetworkStats*

> |Returns the data about the number of connected/disconnected peers, and the number of outgoing/incoming connections with several peers at a certain height.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Returns the data about the number of connected/disconnected/banned peers, and the number of outgoing/incoming connections with several peers at a certain height.
```

# TYPE lisk_avg_times_blocks_received_info gauge
lisk_avg_times_blocks_received_info 1

# HELP lisk_avg_times_transactions_received_info Average number of times transactions received
# TYPE lisk_avg_times_transactions_received_info gauge
lisk_avg_times_transactions_received_info 0

# HELP lisk_node_height_total Node Height
# TYPE lisk_node_height_total gauge
lisk_node_height_total 17268

# HELP lisk_finalized_height_total Finalized Height
# TYPE lisk_finalized_height_total gauge
lisk_finalized_height_total 17267

# HELP lisk_unconfirmed_transactions_total Unconfirmed transactions
# TYPE lisk_unconfirmed_transactions_total gauge
lisk_unconfirmed_transactions_total 0

# HELP lisk_peers_total Total number of peers
# TYPE lisk_peers_total gauge
lisk_peers_total{state="connected"} 0
lisk_peers_total{state="disconnected"} 0

# HELP lisk_fork_events_total Fork events
# TYPE lisk_fork_events_total gauge
lisk_fork_events_total 0
----

You can configure Prometheus to automatically invoke the aforementioned endpoint after regular intervals.
For more information, see the {url_prometheus_configuration}[Configuration^] section of the Prometheus documentation.

> Configuring the Prometheus to automatically invoke the aforementioned endpoint and then, plugging such data to visualizing tools like Grafana can enable a node operator to stay up to date with the latest status of their node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Configuring the Prometheus to automatically invoke the aforementioned endpoint and then plugging such data into visualizing tools such as Grafana, can enable a node operator to stay up to date with the latest status of their node.
```
